---
layout: post
title: "João Chaves: The Doctrine of Christian Discovery's Influence in the Americas" 
subtitle: "Episode 7 Doctrine of Christian Discovery Podcast Special Season"
description: "João Chaves explains how evangelical missions fueled colonization in Brazil and beyond."
excerpt: "The podcast explores how a centuries old Christian doctrine encouraged conquest and colonization of non Christians and how its legacies still affect various lands and peoples"
date: 2024-02-20
author: adamdjbrett
categories: 
 - special
tags:
  - doctrine
  - theology
  - colonization
  - indigenous
  - land
image: /assets/images/doctrine-christian-discovery.webp
image_alt: Doctrine of Christian Discovery Podcast cover photo.
---
<iframe src="https://playlist.megaphone.fm/?p=AOOOI2818414790" width="100%" height="482" frameborder="0"></iframe>

[⤓ Download a transcript of the Episode as a PDF](/assets/pdfs/special/07-Joao-Chaves-Influence-in-the-Americas.pdf) //  Listen to the podcast on [Megaphone](https://megaphone.link/AOOOI9257433215), [Spotify](https://open.spotify.com/show/4VnMhbq2UJbu3fdehsQ66I) or [Apple](https://podcasts.apple.com/us/podcast/doctrine-of-christian-discovery/id1729219360). [Listen on Good Faith Media](https://goodfaithmedia.org/doctrine-of-christian-discovery/).

  
## Introduction

We begin this episode with a [land acknowledgement](/land/).

The podcast explores how a centuries-old Christian doctrine encouraged conquest and colonization of non-Christians -- and how its legacies still affect various lands and peoples.

Special guest: [João Chaves](https://religion.artsandsciences.baylor.edu/person/joao-chaves-phd), assistant professor of the history of religion at Baylor University.

*Don't forget to leave us a review wherever you get your podcasts.*


## Show Notes
- Doctrine of Christian Discovery's impact in the Americas. 0:03
  - João Chaves discusses the influence of the doctrine of Christian discovery in Latin America and South America, providing examples of its impact on government frameworks in the region.
- The Doctrine of Discovery's impact on indigenous peoples in Brazil. 4:22
  - Brazil's history of indigenous land appropriation traced back to the Doctrine of Discovery and the Portuguese Empire.
  - Indigenous rights in Brazil face encroachment from market forces and religious leaders.
  - complex issue of evangelicalism's impact on indigenous peoples, including promotion of Doctrine of Discovery.
- Brazilian evangelicalism and its connections to US politics. 11:23
  - Evangelicalism in Brazil has a long history of transnational connections and support from the US, particularly during the dictatorship.
  - Protestantism in Brazil grows due to government support and evangelical networks, despite social conservatism.
  - João Chaves highlights the rapid spread of Christianity in Brazil and the factors that contributed to its growth.
  - In Brazil, Pentecostalism has grown rapidly due to urbanization and the crisis in the Catholic priesthood, with Afro-Brazilian religions also playing a role in conversion.
  - Sociologists and scholars have noted how Pentecostalism's adaptability and cultural alignment with Afro-Brazilian religions have contributed to its growth, leading to a shift away from Catholicism and Afro-Brazilian religions.
- Religion's influence on government structures in Brazil and the US. 21:59
  - Speakers discuss how religion can influence government structures in Brazil and other South American countries, leading to extremism and white nationalism.
  - Brazil's religious right seeks to impose Christian values on nation through education.
  - Brazil plays a significant role in the US religious right's global connections, despite cultural differences.
- Fascism, history, and social inequality. 28:50
  - João Chaves suggests that the appeal of fascism may be due to the relatively short history of democracy, as it has not been the dominant form of governance for a long time.
  - João Chaves argues that post-WWII aspirations for a more united world remain unrealized due to ongoing issues like segregation, hunger, sexism, homophobia, and limited definitions of humanity.
  - White supremacy reacts to diminishing role in society as minoritized groups diversify.
- Addressing societal issues and systemic change. 35:50
  - João Chaves reflects on hope for future generations, citing Cornel West's optimism despite challenges.
  - He discusses the complexities of systems of oppression with students, acknowledging the challenges of living ethically in a deeply ingrained system.

## Resources
* Marshall Trilogy
  * [Johnson & Graham's Lessee v. McIntosh](https://www.oyez.org/cases/1789-1850/21us543)
  * [Cherokee Nation v. Georgia](https://supreme.justia.com/cases/federal/us/30/1/)
  * [Worcester v. Georgia](https://www.oyez.org/cases/1789-1850/31us515)
* [Onondaga Nation Land Claim](https://www.onondaganation.org/land-rights/)
* [João Chaves, Ph.D.](https://religion.artsandsciences.baylor.edu/person/joao-chaves-phd),, Assistant Professor of the History of Religion in the Américas and Co-Director of the Baptist Scholars International Roundtable (BSIR).
### **Books**
- With T. Laine Scales (eds.), *Baptists and the Kingdom of God: Global Perspectives* (Waco: Baylor University Press, 2023).
- With Mikeal C. Parsons, *Remembering Antônia Teixeira: A Story of Missions, Violence, and Institutional Hypocrisy* (Grand Rapids: Wm.B. Eerdmans, 2023).
- *The Global Mission of the Jim Crow South: Southern Baptist Missions and the Shaping of Latin American Evangelicalism* (Macon: Mercer University Press, 2022).
- *Migrational Religion: Context and Creativity in the Latinx Diaspora* (Waco: Baylor University Press, 2021).
- *O Racismo na História Batista Brasileira: Uma Memória Inconveniente do Legado* *Missionário* (Brasília: Novos Diálogos, 2020).         
- *Evangelicals and Liberation Revisited: An Inquiry into the Possibility of an Evangelical-Liberationist Theology* (Eugene: Wipf & Stock, 2013).

### **Edited Journal Issues**
- *Christianity, Race, and Ethnicity: Latinx Critical Conversations on Identity Construction and Religious Participation*, Perspectives in Religious Studies, 49/4, Winter 2022.
  - Contributors: Gerardo Marti, Raimundo Barreto Jr., Robert Chao Romero, Angela Tarango, Jonathan  Calvillo, Rodrigo Serrão, Brett C. Hoover, and Jennifer Owens-Jofré

### **Peer-Reviewed Articles**
- With Godfrey Harold, "Constructing Afro-Descendant Christianties: Towards Hemispheric Histories for Racial and Ethnic Solidarity" in *The South African Baptist Journal of Theology*, 30 (2021), 172-181.
- With Rodrigo Serrão, "Immigrant Evangelicalism in the COVID-19 Crisis: Reactions and Responses from Brazilian Evangelical Churches in Florida" in *The International Journal of Latin American Religions *4 (September 2020): 235-249.
- "Exporting Holy Fire: Southern Baptist Missions, Pentecostalism, and Baptist Identity in Latin America" in *Perspectives in Religious Studies* 47.2 (Summer 2020): 203-214.
- "Expanding the Fear of the Mongrel: Baptist Missions in Latin America and Transnational Racist Cross-Pollination" in *Baptist History and Heritage Journal* LIV.2 (Summer 2019): 81-91.


### Related Episodes
- [https://podcast.doctrineofdiscovery.org/season4/episode-06/](/season4/episode-06/)
- [https://podcast.doctrineofdiscovery.org/special/episode-04/](/special/episode-04/)
- [https://podcast.doctrineofdiscovery.org/season3/episode-02/](/season3/episode-02/)

## Credits

- **Hosts:** Mitch and Tanner Randall, Good Faith Media.
- **Executive producers:** Mitch Randall, Good Faith Media; Philip P. Arnold and Sandy Bigtree, Indigenous Values Initiative; and [Adam DJ Brett](https://adamdjbrett.com), Syracuse University and American Indian Law Alliance.
- **Producer:** Cliff Vaughn.
- **Editor:** David Pang.
- **Music:** Pond5.
- **Production Assistance:** American Indian Law Alliance.
- **Sponsors:** The Henry Luce Foundation; Syracuse
University; Indigenous Values Initiative; American Indian Law Alliance; American Indian Community House; Good Faith Media; Tonatierra; and
Toward Our Common Public Life. We appreciate your support.

## Citation

Mitch and Tanner Randall, "João Chaves: The Doctrine of Christian Discovery's Influence in the Americas," _Doctrine of Christian Discovery_ (Podcast), February 20, 2024. <https://podcast.doctrineofdiscovery.org/special/s07/>.