---
layout: post
title: "S05E02: Exploring the Legacy of Vine Deloria Jr. on Native American Thought with Philip Deloria" 
subtitle: "Our hosts Philip P. Arnold and Sandy Bigtree speak with Philip Deloria"
description: "Philip Deloria shares Indigenous scholarship reshaping American religious and political life."
excerpt: "Discover the transformative power of Native American thought and religious studies in our conversation with the esteemed Philip Deloria"
author: adamdjbrett
date: 2024-09-02
categories: 
 - season5
tags:
  - doctrine
  - theology
  - indigenous
  - colonization
  - reparations
image: /assets/images/mapping-doctrine-of-discovery-favicon.webp
image_alt: mapping the Doctrine of Discovery cover photo.
---

<div id="buzzsprout-player-15342841"></div><script src="https://www.buzzsprout.com/1926214/15342841-s05e02-exploring-the-legacy-of-vine-deloria-jr-on-native-american-thought-with-philip-deloria.js?container_id=buzzsprout-player-15342841&player=small" type="text/javascript" charset="utf-8"></script>

[⤓ Download a transcript of the Episode as a PDF](/assets/pdfs/S05E02-The-Legacy-Vine-Deloria-Jr-Native-American-Thought-Philip-Deloria.pdf) // [→ Subscribe](/subscribe/)

## Introduction

We begin this episode with a [land acknowledgement](/land/).

In this episode of the Mapping the Doctrine of Discovery podcast, hosts Phil Arnold and Sandy Bigtree interview [Philip Deloria](https://history.fas.harvard.edu/people/philip-deloria), a scholar of history and Indigenous Studies/Native Studies. In this episode we discuss how Indigenous/Native Studies is expanding into various venues and exploring new possibilities. There is growing interest in the connection between the founding of Western democracy and the Haudenosaunee, as well as the impact of colonization and the Doctrine of Discovery. Indigenous practitioners and scholars are coming together to address the rise of fascism and domination worldwide and to find alternative ways of living on the Earth. In Native American history, there is a focus on economic analysis, particularly the management of annuities and trust funds by the federal government. This financial analysis sheds light on the role of Indian money in the development of infrastructure and the economy of the United States. Overall, Native Studies is evolving and addressing complex issues related to history, identity, values, and the relationship between indigenous peoples and the natural world.

## Show Notes
In the latest episode of our podcast, we delve into the transformative legacy of [Vine Deloria Jr.](https://www.colorado.edu/law/2023/02/06/vine-deloria-jr-70) and the enduring impact of Native American thought with Professor [Philip Deloria](https://history.fas.harvard.edu/people/philip-deloria). This enlightening conversation covers a range of critical topics, from the contributions of the Deloria family to theology and Native American discourse, to the dynamic intersections between indigenous knowledge and modern political movements.

Our episode begins by [mapping](/) the [Doctrine of Discovery](https://doctrineofdiscovery.org/what-is-the-doctrine-of-discovery/), where Philip Deloria provides a rich discussion on his father's profound influence on religious studies and Native American thought. Vine Deloria Jr.'s seminal works, such as "[*God is Red*](https://www.fulcrumbooks.com/product-page/god-is-red-50th-anniversary-edition)," have significantly shaped academic and theological landscapes. The conversation highlights the Deloria family's religious heritage and their involvement in the Episcopal Church, offering insights into how these experiences have informed their unique contributions to theology and Native American discourse. We explore Vine Deloria Jr.'s academic and religious background, tracing the evolution of his ideas from the late 1950s through the Red Power Movement of the 1960s.

The discussion then shifts to the evolving role of the church in Native American communities. From the late 19th century through the Red Power Movement, the church served as a means for reimagining older social structures, despite critiques from different generations within Native families. We highlight Vine Deloria Jr.'s important stance in "*[Custer Died for Your Sins](https://www.oupress.com/9780806121291/custer-died-for-your-sins/),*" his brief tenure with the National Council of the Episcopal Church, and his subsequent disillusionment that led to the writing of "*God Is Red*." The church's dual role as a community hub and a site of cultural retention is examined, emphasizing the significance of the [Episcopal Church's 2009 repudiation](https://doctrineofdiscovery.org/the-episcopal-church-usa/) of the Doctrine of Discovery. This conversation underscores the enduring impact of colonialism and the revival of indigenous ceremonies within Native communities.

A particularly intriguing segment of the episode explores the phenomenon of "playing Indian" in both American and European contexts. Historical and contemporary examples, from the Boston Tea Party to modern New Age movements, are discussed. We recount a visit to the Max Planck Institute and the Karl May Museum in Germany, where Germans exhibit a fascination with Native American culture, often dressing up as Lakota people. This practice is contrasted with American cultural appropriation and settler colonialism. The historical impact of Karl May's literature on German perceptions of Native Americans and its disturbing links to Nazi ideology are examined, highlighting the complexities of cultural performance, identity, and the global implications of these practices.

The episode also delves into the dynamics of settler colonialism and its impact on indigenous identity and culture in America. The erasure and displacement of indigenous peoples are discussed, along with settlers adopting indigenous identities to claim a sense of belonging to the continent. We explore historical practices from the Boston Tea Party to contemporary New Age movements, highlighting the duality of love and hate, desire and repulsion in these actions. The implications of place naming, from appropriating indigenous names to imposing classical European ones, are examined, illustrating the historical narrative of land grants and the doctrine of discovery in [Onondaga Nation territory](https://www.onondaganation.org/).

Oral tradition and indigenous knowledge are critical themes in this episode. We explore the distinctions between oral tradition, oral history, and memory, emphasizing their roles in preserving historical knowledge. Reflecting on personal memories and broader oral histories, the conversation addresses the legitimacy and importance of these forms of knowledge. The dynamic nature of oral traditions is highlighted, along with the significance of indigenous media like wampum belts. The repatriation of wampum belts and the reassembly of their meanings through dreams and ceremonies are discussed, underscoring the ongoing interrelationship with the natural world.

The episode also addresses current trends in Native Studies, including the global rise of fascism and the search for alternative ways of living. The economic analysis of Indian land and wealth, and the shift from military to financial records, are explored. The significant contributions of scholars like Bobby Lee and Emily Connolly are highlighted, examining the role of Indian money in American infrastructure and fiscal history. The convergence of Native American studies with religious studies, focusing on white evangelical racism and Christian nationalism, is discussed, along with the evolution of Native representation in media and the potential for a new era of Native production in the global indigenous context.

The intricate intersections between indigenous rights, contemporary political movements, and the environment.

## Resources
- Philip P. Arnold and Sandra Bigtree, "Ten Religious Themes of the Doctrine of Christian Discovery (DoCD) that Contrast with Indigenous Values," Doctrine of Discovery Project (26 September 2022), <https://doctrineofdiscovery.org/10-religous-dimensions/>.

- Philip P. Arnold, _The Urgency of Indigenous Values_, (Syracuse: SU Press, 2023), <https://press.syr.edu/supressbooks/5835/urgency-of- Indigenous-values-the/>

- [Philip Delora](https://history.fas.harvard.edu/people/philip-deloria)
  - *Playing Indian*
  - *The Blackwell Companion to American Indian History *
  - *C.G. Jung and the Sioux Traditions*
  - *American Studies: A User's Guide*
  - *I Heart Nixon: Essays on the Indigenous Everyday*
- Vine Deloria Jr.
  - *God Is Red: A Native View of Religion*
  - *Behind the Trail of Broken Treaties: An Indian Declaration of Independence*
  - *Custer Died For Your Sins*
  - *Power and Place: Indian Education in America*
  - *Red Earth, White Lies: Native Americans and the Myth of Scientific Fact*
  - *Spirit and Reason: The Vine Deloria, Jr. Reader*
  - *The World We Used to Live In: Remembering the Powers of the Medicine Men*
  
  


### Related Episodes
- [S05E01: Bridging History and Today: Religion, Law, and Indigenous Influences in American Democracy with Winnifred Fallers Sullivan](/season5/episode-01/)
- [S03E01: The Hidden Roots of White Supremacy and the Doctrine of Christian Discovery an interview with Robert P. Jones](/season3/episode-01/)
- [S04E02: Exploring the American Religious Tapestry: From Civil Religion to Secularism and the Impact of the January 6th Insurrection](/season4/episode-02/)

## Credits

- **Music**: Onondaga Social Dance songs performed by Orris Edwards and Regis Cook
- **Producers**: [Jordan Loewen-Colón](https://www.jordanbradyloewen.com/) and [Adam DJ Brett](https://adamdjbrett.com)
- **Show notes**: [Adam DJ Brett](https://adamdjbrett.com)

## Citation

Philip P. Arnold and Sandra Bigtree, "S05E02: Exploring the Legacy of Vine Deloria Jr. on Native American Thought with Philip Deloria," _Mapping the Doctrine of Discovery_ (Podcast), September 02, 2024. <https://podcast.doctrineofdiscovery.org/season5/episode-02/>.