---
layout: post
title: "S02E08: Exploring the Doctrine of Discovery, Indigenous Struggles, and the Pursuit of Balance Part 2 with Oren Lyons"
description: "Our guest is Onondaga Nation Turtle Clan Faithkeepr Oren Lyons."
date: 2023-08-11
categories: 
 - season2
tags: 
  - Christianity
  - Johnson
  - theology
  - ideology
excerpt: 
image: /assets/images/mapping-doctrine-of-discovery-favicon.webp
image_alt: mapping the Doctrine of Discovery cover photo.
---

<div id="buzzsprout-player-13285222"></div><script src="https://www.buzzsprout.com/1926214/13285222-s02e08-exploring-the-doctrine-of-discovery-indigenous-struggles-and-the-pursuit-of-balance-part-2-with-oren-lyons.js?container_id=buzzsprout-player-13285222&player=small" type="text/javascript" charset="utf-8"></script>

[⤓ Download a transcript of the Episode as a PDF](/assets/pdfs/S02E08-Exploring-Doctrine-of-Discovery-Indigenous-Struggles-Pursuit-of-Balance-Part-2-TRANSCRIPT.pdf) // [→ Subscribe](/subscribe/)

## Introduction
We begin this episode with a [land acknowledgement](https://podcast.doctrineofdiscovery.org/land/).

## Show Notes

In the most recent episode of our podcast, we delved into the past and present implications of the [Doctrine of Discovery](https://doctrineofdiscovery.org/what-is-the-doctrine-of-discovery/) and its profound impact on Indigenous nations and the natural world. Onondaga Nation Turtle Clan Faithkeeper Oren Lyons outlined the complicated recent history of Indigenous struggles for justice and the natural world. He highlighted the urgency of seeking to address our climate crisis especially as [the ice is melting](https://www.peacecouncil.net/NOON/articles/pnl732icemelting.html).\
Faithkeeper Lyons tells the story of several pivotal collaborations for Indigenous rights. He navigates us through the terrain of his personal struggles and the impactful moments in the fight for Indigenous rights. One such moment we delve into is the occupation of Alcatraz Island and the acts of courage that illuminated the path for future struggles.

As we dig deeper, Faithkeeper Lyons opens up about his efforts toward Indigenous rights legislation and the numerous events he helped organize. His journey, fueled by the unwavering support from traditional Indigenous leaders, is a testament to resilience. You'll be left with a profound understanding of Indigenous struggles and the lasting impact of the Doctrine of Discovery. Tune in for an enlightening and thought-provoking episode with Oren Lyons.

Next, we shifted our focus to the concept of balance -- both in our individual lives and in the larger context of the environment. Drawing inspiration from the Tree of Peace, a symbol of harmony and unity among the Iroquois people, we discussed the importance of finding balance between the positive and negative forces within us. This extends to our relationship with the environment, emphasizing the necessity to find equilibrium in our use and preservation of natural resources.

In a world teetering on the brink of an irrevocable environmental climate crisis, this episode is more than just a history lesson. It is an urgent call to action and a reminder of the resilience of Indigenous peoples in the face of centuries of oppression. We are invited to seek balance in our lives, to contemplate our role in the preservation of nature's delicate balance, and to acknowledge the essential wisdom of Indigenous societies in guiding us towards a sustainable future. As Faithkeeper Lyons reminds us, we need a value change for survival.

In conclusion, our discussion highlighted the interconnectedness of history, culture, and the environment. It underscored the importance of acknowledging past injustices and learning from them to shape a future where balance, peace, and environmental preservation are prioritized. As we stand at a critical crossroads, it is imperative that we heed the lessons of the past and commit to a more balanced, equitable, and sustainable future.

## Resources
- Works by Oren Lyons
  - [Value Change for Survival](https://aila.ngo/wp-content/uploads/2023/02/Value_Change_for_Survival.pdf) - PDF
  - *Exiled in the land of the free : democracy, the Indian nations, and the U.S. Constitution,* (Clear Light Publishers, Santa Fe, 1992)
  - ["The Ice is Melting in the North"](https://www.peacecouncil.net/NOON/articles/pnl732icemelting.html)
  - [Sean Kirst: 'It put us in a terrible bind': Six Nations elder Oren Lyons on church 'Doctrine of Discovery'](https://buffalonews.com/news/local/oren-lyons-six-nations-doctrine-of-discovery-roman-catholic-church-pope-francis/article_27372d56-d090-11ed-9d2c-ebf7f3aec330.html)
- Philip P. Arnold and Sandra Bigtree, "Ten Religious Themes of the Doctrine of Christian Discovery (DoCD) that Contrast with Indigenous Values," Doctrine of Discovery Project (26 September 2022), <https://doctrineofdiscovery.org/10-religous-dimensions/>.
- Philip P. Arnold, _The Urgency of Indigenous Values, (Syracuse: SU Press, 2023 (Forthcoming)), <https://press.syr.edu/supressbooks/5835/urgency-of-indigenous-values-the/>

## Credits

- **Music**: Onondaga Social Dance songs performed by Orris Edwards and Regis Cook
- **Producers**: Jordan Loewen-Colón and Adam DJ Brett
- **Show notes**: Adam DJ Brett

## Citation

Philip P. Arnold and Sandra Bigtree, "S02E08: Exploring the Doctrine of Discovery, Indigenous Struggles, and the Pursuit of Balance Part 2 with Oren Lyons," _Mapping the Doctrine of Discovery_ (Podcast), August 10, 2023. <https://podcast.doctrineofdiscovery.org/season2/episode-08/>.

