---
layout: post
title: "S06E01: Defending Mother Earth from The Doctrine of Christian Discovery #NoKings" 
subtitle: "A conversation at the Skanonh Great Law of Peace Center"
description: "This podcast episode explores the Doctrine of Christian Discovery and its impacts on indigenous peoples, particularly the Haudenosaunee (Iroquois) Confederacy. It features perspectives from Onondaga Nation elders Jake Edwards and Oren Lyons, who share the Haudenosaunee worldview centered on gratitude, responsibility, and environmental stewardship. The conversation also includes insights from academics and researchers examining the historical and ongoing legacy of Christian colonialism, the role of Jesuit institutions, and the need to reconcile this history and empower traditional indigenous practices. The discussion emphasizes the importance of listening, learning, and shifting power dynamics to support indigenous sovereignty and environmental justice."
excerpt: "This podcast episode explores the Doctrine of Christian Discovery and its impacts on indigenous peoples, particularly the Haudenosaunee (Iroquois) Confederacy. It features perspectives from Onondaga Nation elders Jake Edwards and Oren Lyons, who share the Haudenosaunee worldview centered on gratitude, responsibility, and environmental stewardship. The conversation also includes insights from academics and researchers examining the historical and ongoing legacy of Christian colonialism, the role of Jesuit institutions, and the need to reconcile this history and empower traditional indigenous practices. The discussion emphasizes the importance of listening, learning, and shifting power dynamics to support indigenous sovereignty and environmental justice."
author: "adamdjbrett"
date: 2025-06-27
categories: 
 - season6
tags: 
  - indigenous
  - religion
  - ecology
  - history
image: /assets/images/special-episode-nokings.webp
image_alt: Special Episode Artwork featuring Onondaga Lake.
---
<div id="buzzsprout-player-17411483"></div><script src="https://www.buzzsprout.com/1926214/episodes/17411483-defending-mother-earth-from-the-doctrine-of-christian-discovery-nokings.js?container_id=buzzsprout-player-17411483&player=small" type="text/javascript" charset="utf-8"></script>

[⤓ Download a transcript of the Episode as a PDF](/assets/pdfs/S06E01-Defending-Mother-Earth-from-The-Doctrine-of-Christian-Discovery-NoKings.pdf) // [→ Subscribe](/subscribe/)

## Special Episode
This episode is a live recording of *The Doctrine of Christian Discovery, The Jesuits, and Laudato si: Defending Mother Earth* an educational event that took place on Saturday, June 14, 2025 from 1:00-4:00PM. This event seredepitiously coincided with the #NoKings protests which were happening across the nation. 

The event at the [Skä•noñh &emdash; Great Law of Peace Center](https://www.skanonhcenter.org/) focused on the [Doctrine of Discovery](https://doctrineofdiscovery.org/), the Jesuits, and Laudato Si. Speakers discussed the Thanksgiving address, emphasizing gratitude and respect for nature. Philip P. Arnold highlighted the Jesuits' role in colonization and the need for Jesuit institutions to address their history. Christiana Zenner and Kim Carrefour stressed the importance of indigenous knowledge and environmental justice. Oren Lyons and Jake Edwards underscored the significance of the Great Tree of Peace and the need for world peace. The discussion concluded with a call for Jesuit institutions to educate on their historical impact and promote reconciliation. The discussion centers on the challenges faced by Native American communities in preserving their traditions and sovereignty. Speakers highlight the impact of colonial hierarchies and the suppression of indigenous practices. They emphasize the importance of language revitalization, food sovereignty, and traditional practices. Historical accounts of forced assimilation, such as the Sullivan Clinton campaign of 1779, are recounted, illustrating the violent suppression of Native cultures. The conversation also touches on the significance of treaties, the role of Christian missionaries, and the need for land return to foster environmental and cultural healing.

## Show Notes:
This special podcast episode explores the [Doctrine of Christian Discovery](https://doctrineofdiscovery.org/what-is-the-doctrine-of-discovery/) and its impacts on Indigenous peoples, particularly the Haudenosaunee (Iroquois) Confederacy. It features perspectives from Onondaga Nation elders Jake Edwards and Oren Lyons, who share the Haudenosaunee worldview centered on gratitude, responsibility, and environmental stewardship. The conversation also includes insights from academics and researchers examining the historical and ongoing legacy of Christian colonialism, the role of Jesuit institutions, and the need to reconcile this history and empower traditional indigenous practices. The discussion emphasizes the importance of listening, learning, and shifting power dynamics to support Indigenous sovereignty and environmental justice.

### Outline
The Haudenosaunee Thanksgiving Address opens our minds to profound gratitude for all living beings and establishes our responsibilities to Mother Earth. Jake Edwards shares how environmental justice begins with gratitude and acknowledging the original instructions given to all parts of creation.

-   The Thanksgiving Address honors the interconnected responsibilities of all beings -- from plants and animals to waters and winds
-   What we do today must not negatively affect seven generations to come
-   Onondaga Lake is the birthplace of democracy and the Great Tree of Peace
-   Indigenous communities have survived attempts at genocide but now face environmental threats affecting all humanity
-   Colonial institutions displaced indigenous knowledge systems that held sustainable relationships with the land
-   Climate change represents a "compound effect" that will continue worsening
-   Returning land to indigenous stewardship is the most direct path to environmental healing
-   The Great Tree of Peace symbolizes that peace, equity, and union form the foundation of Haudenosaunee values
-   Academic institutions should recognize their role in colonial history and work toward repair
-  Return the land without question to who it belongs to. Then you'll get your answers to a better environment.

## Guest List
* Jake Haiwhagai’i Edwards
* Faithkeeper Oren Lyons
* Philip P. Arnold
* Sandy Bigtree
* Christiana Zenner
* Kimberly Carfore
* Richard J. Callahan, Jr.



### Additional Resources:

  * [The Thanksiving Addresss: Or the Words that Come Before All Else](https://americanindian.si.edu/environment/pdf/01_02_thanksgiving_address.pdf)
    * [Order a Copy from the Tracking Project](https://thetrackingproject.org/the-tracking-project-teaching-resources/)
  * [The Skä·noñh—Great Law of Peace Center](https://www.skanonhcenter.org/)
  * [The Indigenous Values Initiative](https://indigenousvalues.org/)

## Credits

- **Music**: Onondaga Social Dance songs performed by Orris Edwards and Regis Cook
- **Producers**: [Jordan Loewen-Colón](https://www.jordanbradyloewen.com/) and [Adam DJ Brett](https://adamdjbrett.com)
- **Show notes**: [Adam DJ Brett](https://adamdjbrett.com)

## Citation
Philip P. Arnold and Sandra Bigtree, "S06E01: Defending Mother Earth from The Doctrine of Christian Discovery #NoKings: A conversation at the Skanonh Great Law of Peace Center," _Mapping the Doctrine of Discovery_ (Podcast), May 19, 2025. <https://podcast.doctrineofdiscovery.org/season5/episode-08/>.
