---
layout: post
title: "S04E03: Reclaiming Sacred Ground: Indigenous Sovereignty, Environmental Wisdom, and the Path to Restorative Justice with Patrick Gonzalez-Rogers" 
description: "In this episode of the Mapping The Doctrine Of Discovery Podcast, hosts Phil Arnold and Sandy Bigtree interview Patrick Gonzalez-Rogers, a faculty member at the Yale School of Environment."
subtitle: "Season 04"
date: 2024-04-23
categories: 
 - season4
tags: 
  - religion
  - environment
  - Indigenous-studies
  - religious-studies
excerpt: 
image: /assets/images/mapping-doctrine-of-discovery-favicon.webp
image_alt: mapping the Doctrine of Discovery cover photo.
---
<div id="buzzsprout-player-14830942"></div><script src="https://www.buzzsprout.com/1926214/14830942-s04e03-reclaiming-sacred-ground-indigenous-sovereignty-environmental-wisdom-and-the-path-to-restorative-justice.js?container_id=buzzsprout-player-14830942&player=small" type="text/javascript" charset="utf-8"></script>

[⤓ Download a transcript of the Episode as a PDF](/assets/pdfs/S04E02-Exploring-the-American-Religious-Tapestry.pdf) // [→ Subscribe](/subscribe/)
  
## Introduction

We begin this episode with a [land acknowledgement](https://podcast.doctrineofdiscovery.org/land/).

In this episode of the Mapping The Doctrine Of Discovery Podcast, hosts Phil Arnold and Sandy Bigtree interview Patrick Gonzalez-Rogers, a faculty member at the Yale School of Environment. They discuss the doctrine of discovery and its ongoing impact on Indigenous peoples and the environment. Gonzalez-Rogers highlights the need to challenge the Western construct of law and its narrow definition of religion, which often fails to recognize the sacredness of the land and the interconnectedness of all things. He also suggests the possibility of engaging Christian denominations in conversations about returning land to Indigenous communities as a form of restorative justice. The hosts and guest emphasize the importance of Indigenous perspectives and traditional knowledge in shaping environmental policy and conservation efforts. They also discuss the need for a political shift and a new set of values that prioritize sustainability and the well-being of the Earth.

## Show Notes
The relationship between humanity and nature is intricate and sacred, a fact that has been the cornerstone of Indigenous communities' philosophies for centuries. In the latest podcast episode titled "Reclaiming Sacred Ground: Indigenous Sovereignty, Environmental Wisdom, and the Path to Restorative Justice," listeners are invited to explore the complex interplay between Indigenous wisdom, environmental stewardship, and the quest for justice. The episode shines a light on the pressing need for policies that respect and incorporate the voices and rights of Native American communities.

Our distinguished guest Pat Gonzalez-Rogers brings forth the historical context of the Doctrine of Discovery, detailing its pervasive impact on Indigenous peoples and the continuous exploitation of their lands. The conversation is especially poignant when it discusses the protection of sacred sites like Bears Ears, revealing the cultural and spiritual significance these lands hold for Native communities. The experts advocate for a conservation approach that is respectful, inclusive, and one that honors Indigenous spirituality and sovereignty.

The episode underscores the urgency of re-evaluating our environmental laws and policies through the lens of Indigenous perspectives. By embracing traditional ecological knowledge, we delve into a discussion on sustainability that is intrinsically linked to the Indigenous worldview. Here, nature is not seen as a commodity but as a community to which humans belong. This mindset shift is imperative for creating durable and sustainable resource management strategies that focus on the well-being of the Earth and its future inhabitants.

Moreover, the concept of restorative justice and land reparations is examined as a means of healing the deep wounds left by centuries of colonialism. The dialogue delves into the transformative potential of concrete measures, such as the return of land by religious denominations, as a step toward genuine restitution for Indigenous communities. This conversation is enriched by insights from historians, attorneys, and thought leaders, who discuss legal and political strategies to right historical wrongs.

The episode culminates with a profound appreciation for the collaborative effort that goes into podcasting and anticipation of future discussions. The acknowledgment of contributors and sponsors emphasizes the collective journey toward a more equitable and balanced future. Listeners are encouraged to continue engaging with these critical narratives by subscribing to the podcast.

As we venture forward, it is crucial to honor the wisdom and environmental stewardship of Indigenous communities. By intertwining their deep understanding of nature's interconnectedness with contemporary environmental challenges, we can pave a path toward a harmonious coexistence. The episode is a powerful reminder of the vital role Indigenous knowledge plays in shaping a sustainable future for all life on Earth.

In essence, this podcast episode serves as a clarion call for collective action. It is a conversation that fosters understanding and respect for Indigenous rights and wisdom, challenging us to consider the profound implications of our environmental decisions. As we face the existential threats of climate change and ecological degradation, the wisdom shared in this episode offers a beacon of hope, guiding us toward a future where humanity and nature thrive in mutual respect and care.

## Resources
* [Uncivil Religion](https://uncivilreligion.org/)


## Credits

- **Music**: Onondaga Social Dance songs performed by Orris Edwards and Regis Cook
- **Producers**: Jordan Loewen-Colón and [Adam DJ Brett](https://adamdjbrett.com)
- **Show notes**: [Adam DJ Brett](https://adamdjbrett.com)

## Citation

Philip P. Arnold and Sandra Bigtree, "S04E03: Reclaiming Sacred Ground: Indigenous Sovereignty, Environmental Wisdom, and the Path to Restorative Justice with Patrick Gonzalez-Rogers," _Mapping the Doctrine of Discovery_ (Podcast), April 16, 2024. <https://podcast.doctrineofdiscovery.org/season4/episode-03/>.